Brand bidding in Google Ads is one of
those things that nobody agrees on.
About a year ago, I got tired of people
telling me that I was religious about my
brand bidding framework and why do I
always have to do brand bidding? Brand
bidding is a bad thing. So, I went in
deep and I went like, okay, what factors
are there for brand bidding? When should
you do brand bidding? When should you
not do brand bidding? How should you do
brand bidding? All these things that
were up in my head. I went like, "Okay,
now I'm just going to show you when and
why and how this is actually a much more
nuanced and important topic than anybody
actually thinks." So, let's jump into
it.
The whole thing is that nobody agrees on
whether or not you should be bidding for
your brand term. And the reason why is
that there are three different types of
businesses in e-commerce when it comes
to your brand bit. If your wholesale DDC
brand, which means that 90 or 80% of
your revenue comes from wholesale, then
your brand is a midterm midfunnel
keyword. Like, think of something like
Nike. Nike shoes is not a bottomfunnel
keyword. It's a midfunnel keyword at
best. And that ranges depending on how
big your wholesale division is. The
second thing is that if you have no
competition for your brand term, there's
no value from bidding on your brand
terms. might want to do it just in case
a competitor comes up and you can
actually see it and get the data. But
that's something else. If you're a
well-known brand, then you will spend
thousands of dollars on your brand term.
And whether or not that's a good
investment on your hand, that's a little
50/50. It really depends how big your
budget is. How much are you spending on
Google Ads today? If 80% of your spend
is going to go to brand terms, then I
will say spend on generic, spend on
non-brand instead. And again at the end
if you have a lot of competition on your
brain terms then finding the right
bidding can decrease your cost by 50 to
80% versus just having smart bidding
with target impression share or target
ros whatever you want to do can actually
decrease your cost by 50 to 80%. The
last group of businesses that I that
that I have is how unique is your brand
term because print ondemand.com is a
tough one to use from a bidding
perspective. And this is why nobody
agrees because all these five examples I
had have different scenarios. The
keyword is maybe a top funnel, midfunnel
or a bottom of funnel. Maybe you have a
lot of competition in your brand term.
Maybe you don't have a lot of your
unique selling propositions that make
you stand out for your competitors. So
you so if somebody searches for your
brains term see your competitor maybe
they're very inclined to go to your
competitor and buy from them instead of
buying from you. That's one of the
things that makes nobody agrees on what
it is in the end. And even the SERs the
search results pages that we see are not
the same. My personal opinion is that
Google shouldn't allow ads on branded
terms. It's a tax on businesses. It's
just like another percent that goes into
Google's pockets. Should be not allowed.
So the perfect circle in my opinion is
that there's nobody bidding for your
brands. But what we get instead is we
get competitors, we get affiliates, we
get retailers that sell our products,
and then we get our own ads. Even in
this example that I have right here,
where you can see that Hexcloud has a
ton of competition here, it it it's most
likely very important for them to be
present in the auction instead of just
leaving it to competitors, affiliates,
their wholesale network, and their
retailers. Here's another example where
we basically have no competition. This
is Caraway. It's more or less the exact
same business as XCloud. They sell the
exact same thing and their DDC brand,
but they have more or less no
competition for their brand term. This
is why nobody agrees on what to do
because even two cases that we will say
are completely similar or not similar at
all. So, let's jump into it. Instead of
asking, should I be bidding for my
brand? The better question to ask is,
well, is brand bidding incremental for
me? Would the conversion have happened
anyway? And the only way to actually
test this is to do a holdout test.
meaning that you split your campaigns
into geographies and then in one in one
group you bid for a brand term and the
other one you don't bid for your brand
term. Afterwards you can look at your
total conversions in your back end and
see before you got 100 conversions uh a
month and then the other one you also
got 100 conversions per month. If you're
bidding for a brand term in this group
and you started saying okay now I
actually get 120 conversions when you
don't bid for a brand term nothing
change. So you want to look at the
relative there and again you want to
have a software that actually does this.
There's things like house. There's a lot
of different softwares out here that
allow you to do this. The only difficult
thing here is that there might not be
enough volume for most of us to measure
this. And this is why I'm I'm fairly
excited about the the incrementality
study testing that we can do in Google
Ads. It should come out this year. I
hope so. I'll do a video on it on
exactly how to do it. But this is the
best way to do it. The second best way
to do it is to simply just stop
advertising for your brand term and see
what happens. Stop one week, start
another. Stop one week, start another.
Stop one week, start another, and see
what happens. You want to try to just
get a sense of what happens when you do
and when you don't. And again, remember,
if you don't have any competitors, I'm
telling you, it's not going to have any
difference whatsoever. If you have a lot
of competitors, it might have a big
difference. And then there's also the
aspect of what do you think? Some people
hate it and will not do it. like even if
they they see that there's an impact
from doing it. Other clients that we
have in Savvy are paying way too much
and we can't convince them not to do it.
So that's one aspect to it as well. Now
that we've gone through this, we have
three main scenarios when it comes down
to brand bid. The number one is again if
there's a lot of competition, you should
probably be bidding. If you're selling
to wholesales, you have a lot of
retailers, you should probably bid very
aggressively. If there's no competition,
there's no bidding necessary. The one
thing I want to say about brand bidding
is that we don't want to mix in brand
pitting and new customers. A lot of
people will will look at uh brand
campaign, look at the numbers behind and
say, "Hey, 80% of these or 60% of these
are new customers. So, they should be
built into our overall funnel. The
spender we have on our brand campaigns
should be regarded into a total
marketing investment or marketing
budget." And that's not true. We're not
trying to find out whether or not
spending on branded terms result in new
or existing customers. That's not what
we're doing. We're talking about would
this conversion have happened anyways.
That's the question we try to ask and
answer to find out whether or not it's a
good idea to be bidding for your brand
term. Whether or not that's a new
customer or an existing customer does
not matter. The next thing we look at is
the bidding methodology. So let's say we
figured out that we should be bidding
for our brand term. It's beneficial for
us. This is the way we're supposed to do
it. Then we look at should we use
automatic bidding or manual bidding. The
first thing I want to mention is let's
see when smart bidding or automatic
bidding is great. It works great when
there's a lot of competitors per keyword
or product. If there's a lot of varying
conversion rates across search terms,
devices, audiences, etc. If there's
thousands of keywords, thousands of
products to keep track of, then smart
bidding does excellent. And that's what
it's really good at. However, for
branded keywords, the opposite is the
case. You have very few competitors on
your keyword. You have very stable
conversion rates. You have five
keywords, 10, 20 keywords tops to keep
track of. So this is where there is not
that big of a gain by using smart
bidding and where manual bidding can be
preferred. The one case where I start
going okay where smart bidding can make
sense is for shopping branded campaigns.
You have maybe you have thousands of
products maybe you compete with a lot of
wholesalers on your product ads but you
don't really on your your search ads.
Smart bidding can be better there to to
figure out how to do your best work when
it comes to brand bidding. There's four
tactics that we use. Number one is for
goodness sake use experiments. So let me
jump into an account. Way too few people
use experiments to test any type of
bidding, but especially when it comes to
brand. When we look at this, we have a
brand bid here where we went in
recently. I went and said, "Okay, let's
just try to bid 50% lower." We were
already bidding very low for this
particular case. And I'll be honest,
this was actually an accident. I was
doing another video where I showed how
how experiments work and I just
decreased the bits by 50% and I actually
forgot I'd set it live. But it it shows
it really well. Again, we're spending
very very little. Like this is 400
croner. That is about $80 per month in
an account that spends almost a million.
This is very very little. So 200 croner
uh but no impact on traffic, no impact
on on revenue, no impact on impressions
and only positive of course on the rest
of the things. It even says the
statistical significance on it if we go
and we look at it. So overall use
experiments. It's the best way to
actually run an experiment to find out
whether or not you're betting high or
low. So another way to do this is to
just start decreasing your bids. But the
the thing is that there's there's
confusion that gets added here because
let's say we're just looking at the
search impression share and like okay
we're bidding 13 kroner per bid here or
per click here and our impression search
impression share is 70 97%. Then let's
say when we start decreasing the bid
okay we go from 98% to 92 93 96 96 at
five croner overall seems pretty stable.
we don't really lose much. Let this say
in the client's eyes. Let's go back to
the clicks. So, as we start decreasing
here, we're seeing clicks actually
sustain. And here it went up. The thing
here is that there was a there was a
promotional element. There was a
seasonality in here. So, clicks went up.
It's impossible to us to know would this
amount of clicks have been 4,000 5,000
if we had been bidding higher. And
that's the thing that the client comes
back and say like, well, maybe we missed
out. Maybe our competitors overtook us.
And that's why we're starting to see,
hey, we're starting to increase the CPCs
again because they started to be
nervous. And in my opinion, this was a
mistake here. We're really good earlier
here to do uh experiments and then we
started increasing the CPCs in response
to the client. And as we can see, we're
not getting more clicks. This is a
seasonal thing. Um we didn't we don't
have to bid this high. So again again,
use experiments when you when you're
testing out your brand bidding because
most people don't test. They just see
they get 8x, five, 10x, 20x, 30x, 40x
their their money and think I can't save
money. Big brands can save big bucks on
sh on shaving off half their CPCs and
have no impact on clicks whatsoever. The
second thing is you need to absolutely
abolish affiliates on brand terms. No
affiliates should be allowed. You should
check routinely and you should also
reach out to competitors, especially in
Europe. Doesn't work as much in the
states, but in Europe we can still do
gentleman's agreements where we say,
"Hey, I don't bid for you. you don't bid
for me, especially owner to owner. This
is something that works really well if
brand terms aren't a huge part of the
other person's strategy. Then there's
campaign structure. Always, always,
always separate out campaign structure
in its own campaign and make sure that
you you just exclude your brand term
from dynamic search ads or from
basically from all other campaigns that
you're running. The fourth thing to keep
in mind with brand bidding is always
always always separate out your ROS
reporting. I'll die on the hill that you
should never ever combine reporting for
brand and non-brand traffic. It's just
like retargeting. Your brand bit cannot
take 100% credit for everything that
happened before. It might be a meta ad,
TV ad, a mouth to word interaction that
created that branded search. So your
Google ads can't take credit for it. And
nobody in Google in the Google ads world
should be taking responsibility for your
brand bidding. Your branded revenue goes
up and then they have no impact on it.
When it starts going down, they have no
impact either. So, they're just going to
be sitting there going, I don't know
what to do. Well, we're not responsible
for it, but if you've been taking credit
for it when it was going well, you're
also going to take credit for it or take
blame for it when it starts going down.
So, even if you're an agency, please,
please, please separate out ROS
reporting. One of the last questions I
always get when it comes to brand
bidding is, should I include it in PMAX?
I I put it up into three different
categories. If you're a new brand, I
don't really care. You don't have a lot
of searches, so don't exclude. Exclude.
It doesn't really matter. I will always
exclude it. If you're meta heavy and
move into Google Ads for goodness sake
exclude is the reason why 90% of DDC
brands can't get Google ads to work is
because they don't exclude brand terms
to Google ads when they start spending
a,000$10,000 $50,000 a month. The
majority goes into brand terms in PMAX
and then they go well this is not
incremental. We're not getting more out
of our overall marketing spend when we
spend on Google ads is because they're
overspending on branded terms. And then
the final category is if you're an
existing brand, for goodness sake,
exclude. It's very, very likely that
Pmax will overspend on brand terms. And
again, like I said before, you don't
want Pmax and or anything Google has to
take credit for branded terms. So, in
the end, should you do brand bidding?
Probably yes. You should probably spend
less than what you're spending today on
brand bidding. So, I'd love to hear your
opinion on brand bidding. Where do you
think I'm wrong? Where do you think I'm
right? Comment below and stay tuned for
the next video. If you're into practical
PPC insights that you can actually help
you, then subscribe. I share tips,
breakdowns, and call out what's working
and what's not. No fluff, just the stuff
that you can use every single week.